==PHOTO==
Rommel was forced to go fully on the defensive and, like the British before him, began fortifying his positions. In front of them were powerful wire obstacles and about half a million mines, while the fortified zone itself behind the minefields extended for 2 kilometres in depth. Poor supply — especially of fuel (oil tankers bound for Africa were being sunk by the British), total British air supremacy, and the lack of reinforcements made his situation extremely difficult.

Meanwhile, the British were steadily building up strength for the decisive breakthrough. From Britain came the 51st and 44th Divisions, large quantities of artillery and equipment, including American Grant and Sherman tanks. By the end of October the Eighth Army had grown to 7 infantry and 3 armoured divisions plus 7 independent tank brigades — a total of 220,000 men with 1,100 tanks — against 12 German-Italian divisions (4 German, 8 Italian) with 115,000 men and 600 tanks.

Montgomery planned the offensive on the northern flank, where he secretly massed large armoured forces in the rear. At the same time a large-scale deception operation codenamed “Bertram” was organised. As early as September, large “supply dumps” made of empty crates and boxes under camouflage nets were created in the northern sector. At first the Germans took this as a sign of an imminent attack, but when weeks passed and nothing happened they began to regard it as a bluff. Meanwhile, as the real attack date approached, the empty crates were quietly replaced at night with full ones.

In the south a dummy pipeline was constructed — a double deception that fooled the enemy about both the location and the timing of the offensive (the Germans believed the British would not attack until the pipeline was finished). In the south “tanks” made of plywood were mounted on jeeps; in the north, conversely, real tanks were disguised as trucks with plywood sides.

==PHOTO==
Operation Lightfoot (the codename of the offensive) was scheduled to begin on a full-moon night. Such a night fell on 23–24 October, and the plan was put into action. At 21:40 (British time) on 23 October, after a 20-minute barrage from more than a thousand guns, the British went over to the attack. In the north XIII and XXX Corps advanced with the task of breaching the German defences and clearing corridors wide enough for X Corps (two armoured divisions) to pass through into open desert. In the south the 4th Indian Division and two divisions of XIII Corps (one armoured) attacked with the secondary mission of misleading the enemy about the direction of the main blow and drawing off reserves.

At the start of the battle General Georg Stumme died of a heart attack, and on the evening of 25 October command of the Italo-German forces was once again assumed by Rommel, who had hurriedly flown back from Europe.

Despite British numerical superiority (4:1 in manpower, 5:1 in tanks, 5:1 in aircraft), they were unable to break through the German defences until 2 November. Only after virtually all his armour had been destroyed did Rommel order a retreat.

Deceived by the deception measures, Rommel — contrary to his usual practice of concentrating armour — dispersed his tanks along the front. His army was deployed as follows: on the forward line were five Italian divisions interspersed with one German division and the German Ramcke Parachute Brigade; immediately behind them in the second echelon were, in the south, one German and one Italian armoured division, and in the north two German and two Italian armoured divisions plus two motorised divisions, which were intended to be thrown in to seal any breach. Reserves were unusually close to the forward troops: Rommel believed this would allow him to commit them before the British could mass reinforcements. However, Rommel had fallen ill and on 23 September had gone on medical leave to Austria, handing temporary command to General Stumme, who had been recalled from the Eastern Front.

==PHOTO==
The main battle was concentrated around Tel el Aqqaqir and the Kidney feature at the end of the 1st Armoured Division's path through the minefield. A mile north-west of the feature was Outpost Woodcock and roughly the same distance south-west lay Outpost Snipe. An attack was planned on these areas using two battalions from 7th Motor Brigade. At 23:00 on 26 October 2 Battalion, The Rifle Brigade would attack Snipe and 2nd Battalion King's Royal Rifle Corps (KRRC) would attack Woodcock. The plan was for 2nd Armoured Brigade to pass round the north of Woodcock the following dawn and 24th Armoured Brigade round the south of Snipe. The attack was to be supported by all the artillery of X and XXX Corps.

Both battalions had difficulty finding their way in the dark and dust. At dawn, the KRRC had not reached its objective and had to find cover and dig in some distance from Woodcock. The 2nd Rifle Brigade had been more fortunate and after following the shell bursts of the supporting artillery, dug in when they concluded they had reached their objective having encountered little opposition.

At 06:00, the 2nd Armoured Brigade commenced its advance and ran into such stiff opposition that, by noon, it had still not linked with the KRRC. The 24th Armoured Brigade started a little later and was soon in contact with the Rifle Brigade (having shelled them in error for a while). Some hours of confused fighting ensued involving tanks from the Littorio Division and troops and anti-tank guns from 15th Panzer which managed to keep the British armour at bay in spite of the support of the anti-tank guns of the Rifle Brigade battle group. Rommel had decided to make two counter-attacks using his fresh troops. 90th Light Division was to make a fresh attempt to capture Point 29 and 21st Panzer were targeted at Snipe.

==PHOTO==
The retreat of the Italo-German forces became unstoppable. Rommel’s idea of organising a defence on the nearest line at Fuka proved impossible due to the extreme weakness of his forces. Rommel withdrew his troops to the Mersa Matruh line, but on 8 November was forced to abandon it because of the threat of being outflanked from the south. On the night of 12–13 November the British, possessing a tenfold superiority in men and equipment, occupied Tobruk. On 20 November they entered Benghazi, having covered 850 kilometres in two weeks; finally Rommel managed to hold for several weeks at Ghazala–El Agheila, but was forced to abandon even this position in early December. On 23 January 1943 the British entered Tripoli, so that only Tunisia remained in Axis hands — their last foothold in Africa. By this time the Americans had landed in Morocco and Algeria (8 November), and most of French North Africa had come under Allied control. On 12 May 1943 the Italo-German grouping in Tunisia (250,000 men, half of them German) capitulated, opening the Allies the road to the invasion of Italy.

Thus, the Battle of El Alamein proved to be an important link in the chain of events that within a year moved the front from the approaches to Cairo to the approaches to Rome. However, the relative peripheral nature of the theatre and the comparatively small (by Second World War standards) number of forces involved still make the El Alamein battle secondary and do not allow it to be regarded as one of the truly decisive turning points in the history of the Second World War.